---
layout: post
title: Why you should use NextFlow with R
excerpt: Use workflows to enhance benchmarks and iterative analyses with R
modified: 2020/2/13, 12:00:00
tags: [computation, parallelization, bioinformatics, datascience, cloudcomputing, nextflow, r, biostatistics]
comments: true
category: blog
---

Workflow technologies have been around for a minute. As they continue to be updated and improved and as 
their learning materials and communities mature, there are more opportunities to incorporate them into our
day-to-day development routines to remove some of the tedium and take care of complex pipelines involving 
parallel jobs.

I wrote this post to address a shortcoming I noticed in much of the pedantic material for learning NextFlow 
in the context of benchmarks. Specifically, I found many materials either too general or too pipeline-focused, 
when I was looking for something benchmark focused that also provides a kind of template for doing normal 
development while benefitting from workflow technology. 

Below, I persent the issues and obstacles, and some solutions that I arrived at after much research, trial-and-error, 
and conversations with my exceptionally bright and talented colleagues.

# An implementation of R and Nexflow for deconvolution of RNA-seq data

## The `r-nf_deconvolution` repo

The public repo `r-nf_deconvolution` provides an implementation of R with NextFlow focusing on performing benchmarks of
deconvolution algorithms for bulk transcriptomics data with single-cell RNA-seq reference datasets. Example datasets are
contained in the `./data/` folder, and several setup .R scripts are provided in the `./rscript/` folder to download and 
prepare example data for a workflow run. 

In addition, there are scripts provided in the `./sh/` and `./yml/` folders that
show which dependencies are required and how to install them. For most runs, you will at minimum need a recent version
of NextFlow, R, and the nnls, SummarizedExperiment, and SingleCellExperiment libraries, with additional required 
dependencies for other deconvolution methods besides the non-negative least squares (NNLS) method.

## Most resources describe workflows for pipelines, but we need more for benchmarks

In a general sense, I consider benchmarks to be "wide" tasks. These involve fewer steps but many arguments/parameters per
step. By contrast, pipelines are "tall", meaning they use greater steps but fewer arguments per step. Under these 
definitions, I would describe most of the learning materials I found for NextFlow to be focused on pipelines and relatively 
few resources for using workflows to do benchmarking. Subsequently, it was more difficult to arrive at a solution for managing 
many parameters and also for affiliating parameters with their results, which is crucial for understanding benchmark outputs.

## Obstacles for benchmarking with workflows

There are several key issues for benchmarking with workflows. First, we often aggregate results across multiple sessions, but
the contents of parallel sessions aren't accessible while the workflow runs. To make matters worse, results aren't predictably
stored at a static path. To overcome these problems, we need to publish the results of each session to a new location that is
static, so we know where we can expect to find new results, and that is accessible to every session. Fortunately, NextFlow
has us covered with the publish directory option for processes, explained in greater detail below.

The second main issue for benchmarking is variable or parameter management. This has several sub issues, such as the need to 
track specific parameter values and trace these to their results, the need to repeatedly edit our parameters in a .config file, 
and the need to ensure that we can quickly compare parameter values across runs. I couldn't find good treatment of this topic
in my researching of workflows, so I instead wrote some custom scripts to make this issue tractable. 

## Automating parameter management for benchmarks

First, the user saves a new `workflow_table.csv` file containing one row per run, where column names are either parameters or 
other run metadata. Second, an .R script updates our `params.config` file by reading this .csv and another called 
`params_metadata.csv` specifying which variable is a parameter to be written and which is a metadata columns to be ignored. This 
second table also conveniently serves as a data dictionary for explaining each column in detail. Next, we can run our
workflow with `nextflow run main.nf`. 

Finally, when the workflow completes we can run the .R script to generate our final benchmark results table. This final table 
includes the original parameters, or function arguments, along with new columns reflecting the results of our deconvolution 
analyses (e.g. timed duration of run, true and predicted proportions by type, bias by type, and root mean squared errors [RMSEs] 
either within or across types or across methods). In this way, our input parameters remain linked to the final outputs so that we 
can compare outcomes across methods, conditions, arguments, etc. as is typical for benchmarking.

## Wrapping up

### Key NextFlow concepts discussed

With some digging, it is possible to uncover the key concepts we need for a good benchmarking workflow. For NextFlow, these
concepts are as follows:

* `$launchDir` : The path of the working directory containing the main workflow script (e.g. `./main.nf`).
* `publishDir()` : The publish directory. When specified in a process, results of the process task are copied here on run completion.
* `includeConfig` : This is included in the `nextflow.config` file to load any external .config files with parameters. Once loaded, 
those parameters are usable as variables in the main workflow script.

### Key R concepts discussed

Many of the key concepts to know about for using R with NextFlow can be found by researching R itself. The ones of most relevance here
are:

* `Rscript` : This is the main syntax for running .R scripts from command line (e.g. with `Rscript ./rscript/scriptname.R`).
* `argparse` : An R library developed in Python that makes .R scripts command line callable.
* `Sys.time()` : Base R function for getting the current time. We use this to 
** time the duration of operations for benchmarks (e.g. using `time1 <- Sys.time(); duration <- time1 - Sys.time()`); and 
** assign new timestamps to written filenames to avoid overwriting existing files (e.g. using `as.numeric(Sys.time())`).

### Additional resources

* `r-nf_deconvolution` : Main example repo showcasing how to use R with NextFlow. Shows how to implement the above concepts in the context of benchmarking single-cell RNA-seq deconvolution algorithms.

* `awesome_r-nf` : An index of implementations of R using NextFlow workflows (work in progress).

* `nextflow.io` : Main NextFlow website, including extensive documentation and helpful tutorials.

* `nf-core` : Key resource for NextFlow workflows.

* `awesome-nextflow` : An index of example NextFlow workflows. Includes several bioinformatics/omics data 
processing pipelines.

# Conclusions

We discussed how to use a NextFlow workflow to perform benchmarking with .R scripts.
